We're talking to Norman Mailer.
It certainly is an audacious book.
Would you agree with that?
Well, you know, I'm 74 now, and if you can't be audacious when you're old, then what's the sense of getting older?
No, for young people, if I'd been 35 or 40, it would have been an immensely audacious book because it would affect the rest of my life.
But I think as you get older, the risks seem less...
overbearing than they once were.
What were the risks?
I mean, it seems like an obvious question.
Well, ridicule, ridicule, playing the fool.
You know, the sort of risks that writers face whenever they want to do.
Whenever you want to do something ambitious in writing, you always have cautions.
The cautions are, it better be good or the book reviewers are going to slaughter you.
And that's not because
You can even count on the reviews during any relation to what you've done.
You know, you go out a bad book and get good reviews.
Some writers do.
You go out a good book and get bad reviews.
So it isn't that.
It's that you have to really have the feeling that what you've done was as good as you could make it.
Just make sure you're going as we act.
I'm paranoid about these things.
Well, I get these out of the way, then you can see if it's moving or not.
Just the red light is on, that's what it is.
So, you know, you do try to work with, you do start a book with the knowledge that, and I've said this before, but one of the reasons I have, I'm so interested in fighters, is their lives are so different from writers.
At the same time, there's one album that's similar, which is, particularly as you get older as a writer, what you recognize is, when you write a book, your life is easy.
Well, I mean, you sit at a desk, you have hours on your own.
Well, that part of the road, the working conditions can hardly be improved on.
But when the book comes out, you take punishment.
And it's equal to almost being a club fighter who knows that they're fighting a purse, the purse is going to take care of their families, their kids, their list of that, but they're going to take punishment.
Their body's going to be less good when they're done than when they start.
And so in that sense,
When you get that attitude about reviews that, well, this is part of the punishment I want to take, it makes life a little easier.
You just say, well, is the book worth it?
And are you going to like the book as well as you can write it?
Because the only defense against the review that you think is unfair is to feel that the fault is on the side of the reviewer.
When a reviewer gets through to you, you're exactly like a doctor who's getting hit and hurt and, you know, being the loser.
Did you watch the fight Saturday night, by the way?
Yeah.
It was a good fight.
Very good fight.
I was shocked.
It was so good.
No, and Foreman didn't look at all at home.
He looked remarkable.
But that was a tough guy.
It was a tough guy, and he took a punch.
Oh, yeah.
Anyway, I don't mean golf and boxing, but you brought it up.
No, no, they were taking some very tough punches.
And he took quite a few from Foreman.
Well, I love Foreman's interview, actually.
He said, this guy was good.
He said,
I don't want any more fights like this.
It's supposed to go down.
I didn't hear what he said afterwards.
Well, it was basically that.
He said, I don't want any more fights like this.
He said, I want to box.
I want to put this guy away.
And he said he took a couple of very good punches, and he wasn't going down.
And he said he hurt him.
The foreman said he hurt me.
Yeah, the foreman was very honest after the fight.
He really improved the manners of the fight game.
I think so.
He's such a wonderful example.
Yeah, he does.
He does.
Everybody likes him.
Women like him, you know, which is not boxing people like him.
There's a great novel in Foreman.
I'm not the one who's going to write it, but there is a great novel there because, you know, I saw a fair amount of them in Zaire.
Not personally, because no one could get near them personally.
But I was there, and I wrote a book about that.
Of course, of course.
I didn't realize that momentarily that was the fight.
Yeah, the one in Zaire.
But he was a man who...
And what you can feel coming off of him is this enormous pride.
So when he lost to Ali, it was a disaster for his ego, an absolute catastrophe.
And it took him years to begin to put himself together afterwards.
So the comeback from that and the change in personality is exceptional.
It's incredible.
I can't think of any other public figure in all these years who's had such a change of personality within a period of five to eight years.
Why a novel and not a biography?
And that actually gets us back to this book, too, I think.
You've obviously affected me a month.
I don't mean to do that.
I don't know, just my instinct says that.
A biography would be tough to do because you're not going to get people whose habit is to tell you the truth.
with a boxing-consistent deception.
You're not going to get people around a movie star to tell you what the movie star is really about.
They're concealing what he or she is really about, because they have to.
Their job is to conceal.
When I did that biography on Marilyn Monroe, one of the things I realized at a certain point was my own interpretation of what she was up to, because everything around her was either legend, myth, or calculated distortion.
And Marilyn was as guilty of it as anyone.
She didn't want people to know what she was really like.
She wanted them to see, or she wanted them to be seen, which was very necessary for her.
And the same thing is true with a fighter.
Chigui Torres is one of my great friends.
You know, Jose Torres, who was the light heavyweight champion for 80 years.
And we've had a lot of talks about fighting.
Didn't he kill a fighter in the ring?
No, no, no.
No, Griffith killed Benny Perrette.
Benny Perrette.
Yeah.
No, Taurus, but Taurus, Taurus is very bright.
And so we talk a lot about it.
He's interested in writing.
He writes rather good pieces.
But he wants to write a novel.
And I says, well, he's very hard for you to write a novel.
Because you're used to lying.
You're used to the sections.
You are used to having the other fighters think that you're going to throw a left when you're ready to throw a right.
Of course, this all takes place in microseconds, but the perception is absolutely as half the art of boxing once the players, the fighters, are equal in stamina and condition.
So the habit of telling the truth is not natural to a fighter.
It is to a rider.
A good rider has got the feel of the happiest outcome of anything they attempt
You sort of think closer to the truth.
Get a little closer.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
Go ahead.
Well, that's the great difference.
So in that sense, the people who are around a fighter like Foreman are not going to be a great deal of help in discovering what George is really like.
They're going to try and take you off the sink rather than on it.
And build the legend as opposed to penetrating.
Yes.
And so with a novel, you've been penetrated if you know enough.
I don't know enough.
I think you'd have to be a black man to write that novel.
Would you call him Foreman?
Or would you just be a foreman-like character?
That would depend on the particular literary conceit I was working with.
Because it's pertinent, I think, to this book, too.
No, you could write a novel and call him foreman, and then talk about the fact that you called foreman, that doesn't mean you got him.
That it's another character who you were calling foreman.
Well, it was, for instance, with the executioner song, when I called Gilmore, Gilmore.
I mean, I could have called him...
Harry Kilmore.
Yeah, but that was a non-fiction novel.
I mean, that was... Yeah, but what I'm going to... I could have written it as a novel, a key novel, and everybody said Harry Kilmore is Gary Gilmore, and so forth and so on.
But my feeling was I wanted to dramatize the fact that you can be as careful as you wish with your facts.
And we were much more careful than the average story on Gilmore.
We really... Larry Schiller is very, very good at doing research, investigative reporting, and
I worked with him.
I learned a lot from him about the best day of reporting.
But the point is that we knew as much about Gilmore as anyone alive, and I still knew I was writing fiction.
I still knew I was writing fiction.
Is that what you said?
I'm sorry, is that what you said?
Yeah.
Yeah, okay.
Just want to make sure I get there.
No, no, I knew as much about him factually as anyone could possibly know.
We interviewed something like 300 people before we were done.
people in Utah were great to interview because they were essentially innocent.
Most of them had never been interviewed before, and so it was an extraordinary experience for them to talk.
In fact, Schiller would always question them for an hour about their own life, no matter how minor they were to the story.
He'd have them talk for an hour about their own life before he'd ask the question, when did the name of Gary Gilmore first occur?
When did you first hear the name of Gary Gilmore?
And then they were so ready to talk about Gilmore and their relationship that it worked very, very well.
Yet we had the time to do that.
It wouldn't work with someone who's used to being interviewed.
They're thinking, come on, let's get to the story.
Okay, let's cut to it.
But it did work that way.
But all the same, the more I learned about him, the more I knew that I could only make an approximation of what he was probably like.
And finally, it was fiction.
I wanted to dramatize that fact.
So were you faced with similar dilemmas here with Jesus?
Well, it was no dilemma at all.
It's an impossibility to have the conviction for one moment that you know who Jesus is.
But, you know, I believe in this.
It's an impossibility, but you interpret it anyway.
Well, because certain impossibilities are much more comfortable than others.
It's an odd remark, and I never made it before.
But when you're writing, particularly if you've been writing novels as long as I have for as many years, there's certain books that appeal to you because you feel that everything in your instinct tells you that you can do something with this.
And the older you get, the more often that instinct is correct because it has a lot of experience to be able to judge what can be done and not be done.
And I remember when I read the New Testament,
The feeling I had is I can write something, I can do something very interesting with this story.
The story appealed to the agreement.
This is a recent reading of the New Testament.
I read it about two years ago for the first time in maybe, oh, probably since college.
And with the idea that something like that?
No, no, I just read it.
I was curious about it.
I read Pope John Paul's book that he did with a Vatican journalist.
And I've been interested in Pope John Paul for a long time because back about, oh, back about ten years ago,
He had an encyclical.
Unfortunately, I can't remember the number.
But in that encyclical, he spoke of the two superpowers who were dominating the third world countries.
And one stood for greed and the other stood for oppression.
This was, of course, still during the Cold War.
And besides the third world, there was a fourth world of the homeless.
It was a lot more typical.
At the end of it, he said that it's necessary to protect the third and fourth world.
Maybe the Vatican will have to sell its treasures.
Yeah, nothing ever happened with this historical.
Nothing.
At the time, it was a revolutionary document.
You know, post-selling the treasures of the Vatican?
Well, I mean, you know, I think what it was was
is their feeling is let him say what he wants to say and we'll do what he wants to do.
I'm working on a book myself where I'm going to be spending some time at the Vatican Library.
I hope my memory is right.
I don't know why, I think it was the sixth encyclical.
But I can give you the year approximately.
It was in the late 80s.
And I think it was the only encyclical he wrote in that period.
Late 80s, this is Pope John Paul II.
Yes, yes.
Okay, good.
Okay, great.
I'm sorry.
And, no, it's well, it's beautifully written.
And I remember at the time I was so impressed with it.
I'm not, I mean, I'm not only Jewish, but I'm not in any way Catholic.
I find the Church fascinating to me, but I'm, you know, I'm not a Catholic.
And it was certainly something to look at.
Yes, yeah, well, something to enter, you know.
To go into a fine Catholic church is one of the more agreeable aids to meditation, to put it that way.
Well, I'm Greek, you know.
Our Easter was— So you're an Eastern— Yeah, plus I'm reading this for our Easter over the weekend.
That's got to be something I have to say.
And I know, you know, but it's great theater when you go to a Greek church.
Oh, yeah.
I've been at a Greek wedding.
It really is quite remarkable.
It went on for a long time.
But as you put it, it really is not a Catholic experience, but it certainly is a very dramatic experience.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
I'm sorry.
No, I've been in Russia and seen the reaction of the Eastern church there.
It's something.
Very, very interesting.
But in any event, I brought it up at Penn, and I said, maybe we can make him an honorary member.
God, did I outrage the people at Penn.
Really?
You know, the literary organization.
Yeah, no, I'm a member.
Well, no, they were curious.
This was at the executive board meeting.
Why am I curious?
He's a writer.
That should be the only criteria.
Well, you had a lot of women there who felt that the Pope was the enemy.
You know, he's opposed to abortion, and so forth, and so forth.
They didn't want to hear that he had a social point of view that was
possibly to the left of their own.
I mean, they're moving toward a cooperation, and he's moving toward egalitarianism.
But at any rate, that contradiction fascinated me, and so I read his book some years later, maybe six, eight years later, I read the book, and he was so taken with the Gospel of John that I picked that up and read it.
It wasn't
I thought, no, I'll read all four.
That's going backwards, isn't it?
Well, that's the last.
I'll read all four Gospels.
And dear.
At that point, I thought, there's a book here somewhere.
This story ought to be retold.
And so that's how it began.
But you didn't go into this intending to give us any revelations, so to speak.
No.
No surprises.
No, I have a point of view, a religious point of view, and I have
Believe in God for 40 years, but the facts pretty much are in the way they have been.
Well, what happens is I wrote it.
And then after I'd written a solid first draft, well, if I saw it, I mean, I knew the book was there, and now it was a matter of working on it, working on it, working on it.
But essentially, I didn't have to wonder whether I could write the book now the book was written.
It's a question of what the style finally would be.
I took it through many other things to get the stars where I wanted it.
But I thought, I really am, I can't pretend that my knowledge on this subject is immense.
Quite the contrary.
So I started reading some of the scholars.
I read Fidel and John Dominic Croissant and Funk and John Meyer who wrote
He was written about the historical Jesus.
And I read some of the Apocrypha and the other Gospels.
And the more I read, the more I realized that it was perfectly safe to do what I was doing.
Because no hard knowledge existed of what really might have happened at that time.
There's no agreement whether it happened or didn't happen.
If it did happen, how did it happen?
There are as many variant versions as there are.
Right, in the four Gospels, as he put up.
differ themselves.
Well, they differ immensely, and they differ within themselves.
Obviously, the first three were written by committees.
You know, and I've made this remark before, but it's a little bit like an Arab Israeli document.
That is, since they can't resolve the differences, they put the differences into it.
You see, at least they have a document, even though the differences are there.
Let those people who like one side of the issue take that, and those who like the other take that.
be true to your family, that deserts your family, and so forth and so on.
So at any rate, what I thought was all right, what I'm doing is legitimate.
I could spend the rest of my life studying these matters, and I would know a great deal more about many details and aspects and fascinating excursions from the topic, but I wouldn't know any more about the reality
of Jesus, and what I started with was that the story is the keel, certainly for the last five centuries, has been the keel of Western civilization.
People have grown up around the New Testament in the Western world.
The greatest story that's ever told.
Yes.
And it's a pretty damn good story.
It's a very good story.
In fact, if Putin and Ursula hadn't written that book, and the title would ever occur to me, I might have dared to use the title.
It's a wonderful title, and I wish I had it.
Well, yours is pretty good, too.
Mine was pretty good, but that's a wonderful title.
The greatest story ever told, because it lays down the gauntlet.
At any rate, the fact that it was an impossibility to come up with a real story didn't bother me a bit.
That's the given.
You're not going to come up with a real story.
What you can come up with
is a retelling of the psychological reality of the Western world.
That is that story that exists as the keel of narratives of comprehension, of religious comprehension in the West.
You know, you can't think of the Western world without, I think, nine out of ten people would agree that the keel, the foundation of Western thought, is built
on the New Testament.
And so I thought it's legitimate to, since I'm not trying to deal with the rise of a church, or I'm not dealing with anything but the story, it's legitimate to write about it in innocence.
But it's still being narrated.
That's still where the audacity comes from, is that it's the first person
No, but I've written so many books where I've known a lot about the subject.
Some of my factors will say too much about the subject.
I've written books that took me, one book took 11 years, another took 7 years.
I've done immense research on certain books.
This one comes out of a certain essence.
Yeah.
In other words, sometimes if you don't know too much about a subject, you can do an awful lot with it because you have a fresh eye.
It's absolutely true in movies.
There are very many movie directors, foreign movie directors, who come over to America and make a sophisticated comedy.
Let's say I'll make up, I don't know that any foreign director ever worked with Captain Hepburn.
Well, I remember with...
Greta Garber was made about Russian communists.
It was made out of innocence.
It was a wonderful movie.
You can do that.
You can do that in a novel, rather.
You can work out of innocence.
It's a choice.
If I decided, no, I don't want to, I don't dare to write this book that way, I would have spent the rest of my life writing it.
You know, for instance, I've got to finish the second volume of Harlan's Ghost.
I hope I will finish it before I'm gone.
And that's going to take five years probably.
And that book will not be written in innocence.
That book will be written as a great deal of research.
How about getting the voice right?
Getting the voice of the character here right there.
Well, that was where the work was in this.
It was just a matter of taste.
And I started with a much more biblical version and began to realize that the language
It wasn't working.
The two arcane, two articles perhaps.
No.
Thus it was that I came to the hour, you know, that sort of writing.
And I thought, no, it's not going to work in the first person.
It's going to be simpler.
It's going to be more direct.
And I worked on that.
That goes humor.
I mean, you're talking about calling it a little miracle.
How is this getting to this page?
Well, call it a miracle.
I can do these things.
You know, there are little touches of humor in there.
You have to watch yourself, I think.
Well, you see, the interesting aesthetic problem was one of the strong parts of it, one of my given that's good to begin with, given this wonderful story, I don't have to worry about a plot.
I can't tell you what an immense load that is.
You have to wait with the client to lift 300 pounds, and 150 is taken off the barbell.
The audience with 150, that's very good for him.
If it still looks like 300 pounds to others, that's a huge advantage.
The disadvantage was that the style was going to take forever to get right.
I mean, I wrote the first draft in a few months.
And then it took me probably a good part of the next two years.
Really?
Well, I wasn't working only on that.
I'd do other things and come back to it, do other things and come back to it.
And each time I come back to it, I thought of a, you know, a clearer notion of what the style should be.
Because I wanted a style that was neither modern nor back as far as the King James Version, but would have echoes of it.
And it was readable.
It was not too knotted up in archaism.
At the same time, it was not too modern.
I didn't want a dumbed-down version of the novel.
But it's relevant, though.
The relevance is there, isn't it?
We're talking about the Holocaust.
We're talking about greed and money.
Well, that was what overtained me as I was doing.
I think every month that goes by, this book is becoming more relevant to modern times.
Amazing, isn't it?
Yeah, that part just... And then you see this Hale-Bopp thing, you know, with this New Age blather that these people, you know, the two...
These 39 people that committed suicide to get on the comet.
Yeah, yeah.
And you almost see this, they're almost mouthing things out of the New Testament.
I know, it's a good show.
It's amazing.
Did you see the New York Times story on that today?
No, I saw the headline.
The details on it, huh?
It's unbelievable.
It's almost like a novella.
I mean, it's in length.
It's magnificent.
Yeah, no, that's beyond my imaginative reach, that story, I have to say.
I wouldn't tackle that one.
But imagine you get almost to the end of the millennium, and a comet comes by, and that signals 39 people to let them kill themselves.
No, no, it's amazing.
Well, we're living in amazing times, because everything is out of whack.
Everything is out of whack.
And I think the novel takes advantage of that, and I don't mean to take advantage of that, but you use that as a premise, don't you?
Well, you know, I never liked to write
When I wrote Ancient Evenings, I was not interested in being contemporary for one minute.
In fact, there was one distinguished critic, who shall be nameless, who got the book all wrong, because they said this was Mayer's version of modern America.
It was Ancient Evenings.
It wasn't at all.
I was trying to go as far away from America and the Western world as I possibly could.
I wanted to capture for myself, at any rate, what Ancient Evenings were like.
And...
So it wasn't that I was looking for parallels at all.
In fact, I did my best to remove obvious parallels whenever I found them.
I didn't want the anachronisms of that sort in there, because they can become anachronisms all too easily if you're forcing the material.
But here it was different.
I began to realize that there's a mighty moral message in the words of Jesus Christ, which is, there he is, the first social democrat.
along with everything else.
I mean, that obviously is not what he was up to, but when you have that confrontation between Judas and Jesus, there's the radical talking to the social democrat effect.
I'll tell you, the way you, how often we, as Christians, you know, you go to Sunday school, of course I haven't gone to church in years, but you know the story of the crucifixion, but I mean, you really do give the sense of pain there.
I have to say that sense of when he's nailed to the cross,
pain that he must have experienced.
Yeah.
And you did a magnificent novelist job, I thought.
Did you work hard on scenes like that?
I mean, you're assuming what the pain must have been like to a human, but yet this is the Son of God, too.
Yeah.
No, it's very simple.
You say, what would I feel like?
Yeah.
Because, you know, I was dealing with him as a man rather than as a divinity.
I was wise enough to know that my
powers to divine the nature of divinity are limited.
But I did think, well, as a man, his experience appealed to me very much because I've always been fascinated with worthy protagonists.
He was this extraordinary protagonist.
As a man, he's an extraordinary protagonist.
And on top of that, there's that very artful difficulty of writing about someone who's nicer than yourself.
Very hard to do.
What is it about people who are larger than life, though, for you?
You seem to be drawn to them in your writing over the years.
Well, you know, I've had this life that by now is my life, and I'm used to it, and I'm comfortable within it.
As you do tend to be comfortable as you get older, you know, whatever happened to you, it's your life.
And at the age of 74, you know you're not going to have another kind of life.
It seems to me that all through the early years and the middle years,
was always thinking, should I have this life or should I have that life?
But you get, I suppose what they mean by getting old, wise, and mellow, but finally you realize, well, this is the life I've had.
I'm not going to have another one.
And so looking upon it now, what I realize is that I've had a very odd life because from the age of 25 on, I was a celebrity, whether I wanted to be or not.
And for the first 10 years, I didn't want to be at all.
It created a huge disruption in my life.
I wanted my life to develop
comfortably and normally, and instead I had all sorts of power with people that I didn't feel I'd earned, and vice versa.
People had all sorts of ideas about me that they'd gotten from the media that were very often inaccurate.
And so I used to grouse all the time about it.
You know, this is unfair, this is awful, and of course being secretly pleased with the power and all that.
Well, that...
What I realized at a certain point is I understand people who've had exceptional lives better than I understand people who've had relatively normal lives.
And it wasn't for me to write wonderful, modest novels about essentially where genre.
You know, I couldn't do the sort of thing where, let's say, Van Tyler does.
And does very, very well.
Because it wasn't my life.
What my life...
how to deal with is the questions of identity.
And I suffered with questions of identity long before the word came along.
When the word came along, I finally realized, yes, yes, that's my life.
It's the life of a great many other people.
And so I find it almost easier to write about movie stars and athletes and presidents and people like that, but about ordinary people.
What I loved about the execution of songs was it gave me a chance
to write about people who had lives that were not remarkable in the media.
And Oswald as well, of course.
Well, Oswald was different because that was both the man who's not at all in the media and the man who dominated the media.
But after his death, though.
What?
But after his death.
After his death, yes.
Although, in a funny way, I think it was no surprise to him that he'd have an enormous impact on history.
Oh, he was smiling, yeah.
I think he thought he might have a more positive effect on history than he ended up with, but that's the end of there.
Well, can you see him working the internet?
He'd have a website today, wouldn't he?
Oh, wouldn't he?
Wouldn't he?
I think he does anyway.
He does.
Fifty years, my God, the next, in 1998.
Next year will be the 50th anniversary.
Which means I've been a novelist for 50 years, because that's why I didn't write The Naked and the Dead in two minutes.
Any thoughts on that?
Well, I'm going to do a book, it'll be a large book, probably about 14, 15 hundred pages, which I think we'll probably call it The Best Parts.
And I'll start with The Naked and the Dead, and just take excerpts from all my books, all my books that I think are worth it, and put into a huge book.
Are you going to write anything original for this?
A little bit.
Not a great deal.
But I hope not.
I don't want to spend more than a half year on the book.
My publishers have agreed to do it.
Next May, if I get it out, I'll get it too, but by September.
But that shouldn't be too difficult.
I sort of know what I want to put in.
But it'll be a little bit like an artist's retrospective, a painter's retrospective.
But do you reread your books?
Well, I've been rereading them lately.
It's interesting.
I find the novels, actually, that I like them more than I thought I would.
And the magazine pieces, some of them are not as good as I remember them.
They have marvelous, from my point of view, marvelous little things in them, nuggets.
But they don't read with a... Well, it was journalism in a way.
Well, they're in and out.
They're good.
They're good for five pages.
They're just routine for a few pages, and they get good again.
They don't have the... Not too many of the shorter pieces have a real sweep.
But they have very good nuggets.
Nuggets.
But how do you consider completed work, completed work?
Would there be a temptation to tinker with some of this stuff as you look at it?
Only in the smallest way.
In the Harry James fashion?
I'll cut out a few lines here or there, and I'll announce that to the reader.
I mean, if something's going along very well...
for three or four pages in the middle of the two or three sentences where I got off the tracks.
I don't see any reason to honor it.
This is not a mortal stuff.
This is just good stuff.
So you don't really have a problem, I hate these words, tinkering with them.
Well, Engels once said quantity changes quality.
I think a little tinkering is altogether different from serious tinkering.
That is, I don't think you're violating...
The small history that's involved, if you take out a few sentences here and there, I think there's an enormous difference if I start going in for major revisions.
And then it would take two years if I did that.
And this really doesn't have much to do with this piece, but I can use it for another context.
Any thoughts on the printed book and the novel?
You know, we've had all this talk about the future book and digitized books.
Well, I'm gloomy.
I'm gloomy.
I really fear.
You're what?
Gloomy?
Is that the word?
Gloomy, yeah.
Gloomy is the word.
Because what I fear is that people are going to get used to reading things on the Internet and spend more and more time reading on the Internet.
The Internet is much harder.
The screen is much harder on the eyes on the book.
So the net result of that will be really much less in years to come, number one.
And there's something about the internet that I find sinister in relation to books.
Something, I can't put my finger on it.
I just don't feel good about it.
And also I think people are much less interested in the novel than they used to be.
I think the best novelists are the ones who are going to go first.
I think we're going to be like poets in years to come.
Really?
Yeah, if you want to be a serious novelist, then that's your avocations, no longer your avocations.
You'll need a subsidy to do it, so to speak.
Yeah, but poets, you know, people will respect serious poets, and there's a minority of people for whom poetry is more important than anything.
That's right.
And it'll be true for a small group for novelists.
Are you at all familiar with this...
concept that they have this interactive fiction.
At Brown University, for instance, they have a whole department.
Of interactive fiction?
Well, yeah, they write novels that you access through your computer, and you change it.
I mean, it's not a completed work.
It's not something that the writer, the novelist, has total control over.
It can be changed by... I think they're getting ready for the literary wing on the spaceship.
Jeez.
But they have a course.
They have a department at Brown called Interactive Fiction.
Well, it would be useful for a great deal, but not for writing novels, no.
I think a novel is so personal.
It bears the same relation to serious writing that the orgy does to serious marriage.
No one's going to say that the orgy is without merit for the people who enjoy it.
you see.
But I don't know that that has a hell of a lot to do with maintaining the strength of a marriage for most people.
There will be occasional marriages that benefit from the orgy, but only occasional marriages.
Most marriages will be destroyed by it.
So you really are fearful for the future of the serious novel.
Oh, I said, I feel that the serious novelist in 50 years is likely to be like the coachman in Central Park who takes you out for a ride with his old horse and his old carriage.
Hmm.
You know, it'll be a profession that'll be endearing, but that'll be like the best you can say.
And the bestsellers will be written by computers.
And there's a tendency, there's a real tendency in the world now to put everyone into the computer.
You know, I've also said that part of them, that the women could do well to recognize that that revolution of theirs has accomplished many, many things for them.
They've also been finally...
Why was it welcomed?
Why was it such a painless revolution for them?
Why are they welcomed to a degree into the corporation?
Why are they welcomed into sports?
Why are they welcomed everything?
Because it's easier for the computer.
At the time, men and women become exactly the same.
The computer won't have to deal with a binary system.
They can deal with just one unit rather than two on everything, which will double the power of the computer in years to come.
That's funny.
I don't want to bother you with questions about the novel.
That speaks for itself.
I did want to comment on the 50 years, because that really is quite a remarkable performance.
What makes it agreeable for me is that I'll be 75 next year.
And so 75 and 50 are sort of natural numbers.
And you're two years before the year 2000, which is not insignificant to me.
either.
I mean, you're approaching the year 2000.
You've got half of this, fully half of this century as a professional.
I can get out of that book ahead of the bridge.
What else did I want to, we've got a lot of stuff here.
Have you had any reaction from the church, from priests?
No, no, there was one, where did it appear?
Oh, yes, there was a new story by Bruce Weber who approached the church and approached, I guess, someone who was high in the diocese in New York who said that the church had not come to a decision yet on their attitude toward the book.
And that intrigued me.
I would guess I'd like to think this is true.
It could be that he just was stalling and they hadn't even talked about it.
That's always a possibility.
The other possibility is that they were saying, is this book good for us or bad for us?
And there were people on each side.
And it seemed to me that if I were high in the church, I'd have a tough time deciding.
I mean, the book is sacrilegious in certain ways.
On the other hand, it certainly does not sneer at the story.
It may make the story available to people who would otherwise not come near it
It's a hard call.
Of course, you have Jesus confessing that adultery of the heart.
He even suffers pangs of he can't look at the woman in the eyes.
Well, I think in the New Testament he can't look.
He drops his head and writes in his face.
Is that right?
But you're interpreting what he's feeling there.
I'm interpreting what he's feeling, yes, that he can't look at the woman.
Because he's
He doesn't want to be stirred by him.
Is that the meeting with the devil after 40 days?
Is that in the Bible, too?
Well, there's a meeting on the mountain.
When he's alone on the mountain after 40 days of fasting, the devil does come.
And does God tell him the devil's going to be here?
You know, I honestly don't recall this moment.
But that was very effective.
Yeah, I think in effect he knows God.
I wish I had a New Testament here.
We could look it up.
Yeah, I'm sorry.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure at the moment.
I don't recall.
But that was the novelist's prerogative.
If you listen to the New Testament, it was something I couldn't resist putting in.
So when you had this done, and we're talking about the church, the, you know, where it isn't in yet, were you
mindful while you're revising this thing.
I'm going to take this out.
This is going to piss a few people off.
No, not like that.
You know, I think probably the first version was more respectful than the last.
It wasn't because what I realized was that I'm going to do this.
The last thing I want to do is write a highly irreverent book that mocks it.
That wasn't my interest.
Anyone could do that.
You know, the left for years has been so hostile to anything for good cause, which is
We've had all those terrible years of the Cold War, which went on 20 years longer than it ever had to, with all that false propaganda.
Soviet Union was an evil empire with the forces of Christianity fighting godless materialism.
You know, Ronald Reagan squared, enshrined.
And I couldn't have written this book 10 years ago because I would have felt as if I were working for Ronald Reagan.
But now that the war is over, my feeling is there's a huge divide in the country between the left and
There are many religious people on the left, but there are many more who are not.
And there are many who hate the very notion of Christianity.
And then you've got the far right that are devoted to Christianity and are not really economically greedy, like the corporation.
You've got the Republican Party with its transcendent schizophrenia, the only schizophrenia that seems to work and keep a party alive.
It's hard to believe, because you've got two halves of the party with nothing to do with each other.
One half is...
modest as economic demands and rooted in Christ.
And the other half of it is totally schizophrenic.
Not totally schizophrenic, totally, quite the contrary, totally oriented toward making fortunes.
Greed is God.
Greed is gold.
Greed is good.
And so, and in between that, Bill Clinton has managed to sail the huge ship of the Democratic Party into harbor between the two halves of the Republican Party.
So my feeling is there's no answer.
The corporation's going to get larger and larger and larger and suffuse every pore of American life with its dull power.
But you don't make a political statement with this book, do you?
No, but my point is that what I would be very happy to see is that the left and the right were able to have a dialogue with one another.
And my feeling is this book could be one of the elements of such a dialogue because they can meet in the middle.
Neither side is going to agree with it.
But they at least could speak to one another after reading this book.
Who do you think is the reader of this book?
Norman Mailer readers?
I don't know.
It's too early to tell.
I think a lot of my normal readers, Norman's normal readers, I think a lot of people who like my work are going to be bothered by this book and find it odd.
There are some who say, is Norman selling us out?
There'll be that.
There'll be other people who like my work, who will like this book very much, and will see the logical continuation of this, because ultimately I am a religious writer, for better or for worse.
Just I have my own religion.
My private religion, not my own religion.
I think the people on the... I think the real audience for the book is probably those people who are
Jewish but not devout, who are interested very much in the story because when you're Jewish, that story is away from you, apart from you.
I mean, I know that for, certainly for the first half of my life, I lived in a Christian country, and while I knew a great deal about the country, I didn't feel I knew anything about the core of the country.
So if a book like this had come along when I was 30 or 40, I would have read it with immense interest, I think.
I'd like to think I would have.
So I think for a great many Jews who are not terribly religious, this will be an interesting book.
I think for a great many Christians who are not terribly religious, this will be an interesting book, because their knowledge of the Bible is about, of the New Testament, is about like my memory of the Old Testament.
You see, that I had in childhood.
And they'll go back to it with that, say, oh, this is more interesting than I thought.
And then they'll say, well, let me look at it in the New Testament.
In a certain place, they'll say, gee, Mary didn't get it, or they'll say,
I like his version more than the way it's done here.
You know, I was really looking for these really brilliant comments of Jesus that, you know, to explain, it had to be more than miracles, right, that occasioned his appeal.
You know, you find some very interesting quotes, but maybe it was the writers of the Gospels afterwards who... Some of the quotes are from the Gospels.
What I wanted was that people wouldn't be able to tell which were from the Gospels and which were not.
unless they looked it up to see.
I mean, there are lines in there.
Some of these speeches, though, must be pretty much from the... The longer speeches, the Sermon from the Mount, it's taken entirely from the Sermon on the Mount.
I abridged it.
But that comes from that.
But there were remarks there that I hope people will think it came from the New Testament.
I did.
And they didn't.
Oh, really?
So you said, you got me here.
I didn't have a chance to go to the New Testament to compare them.
My assumption was that they did come from the New Testament.
Not all.
Um...
Anyway, you know, this is not an omnipotent God either, is this?
No.
This God loses back.
Well, that's the huge difference.
You see, people say it's a very reverential book.
Well, it is up to a point.
Beyond that point, it's not at all.
And my feeling was— He loses.
What?
He loses.
Yes, which is certainly a different version of the crucifixion than most people have.
That's triumphant, supposedly.
That's the great moment of triumph.
Yes.
But you don't say it that way at all.
Maybe I was a godless materialist for too many years, but I simply couldn't understand that.
I've never been able to understand that.
It could be a lack of me.
It takes a real leap of faith to believe that.
And I've always found it very hard to understand.
But I found it very hard to understand how a god who's all-good and all-powerful can permit the Holocaust.
And I don't think I'm alone in that.
Well, that's the great problem of our time, really.
Yeah, well, the fact is no major— The philosophical problem of our time.
Well, no major philosopher has come along since the Second World War.
No philosopher of the stature of the philosophers of the 19th century.
Makes sense.
How can you deal with anything when you have to get by that?
Yeah.
Well, to me, and I am at my highest, I'm only a small and amateur philosopher.
But it just seems to me that the moment you say, God may be all good, but he's not all powerful.
Or if he's all powerful, he's not all good.
So I prefer the first option.
Do you remember that wonderful book about ten years ago, a great title, Why Did the Skies Not Darken?
And that was about the Holocaust.
Yeah, yeah.
Why did the skies not darken?
That's the essential dilemma right there, isn't it?
Yeah.
From a philosophical perspective, I guess.
Listen, you've been generous with your time.
I think we talked about the devil.
The devil, anything I missed that we should go over?
Well, I think I'd better take five minutes before the next gentleman arrives.
Okay, what I'd like to do is...